Orla Doyle on creating reproducible static reports.
Cool.
Thanks very much.
Thanks everyone.
Really nice to be here all the way from Dublin.
Good way to fight the jet lag is have a talk in the afternoon
because the adrenaline kind of overrides that.
So I'm going to talk about a process of automated reporting
and I'm also going to talk a little bit about how we work
in the pharmaceutical industry.
Just to give you some insight into kind of what's a bit
different about some of the ways that we work.
So these are my disclaimers.
So these views are my own and don't represent the company
that I work for.
So pharmaceutical industry does lots of things, but the part
of the pharmaceutical industry that I work in is clinical
drug development.
And so what we're trying to do is we're trying to develop
new medicines and produce robust evidence to understand
whether or not these medicines are safe and effective.
So are they safe and do they work?
And we do this in a very regulated way and that's not something
we're trying to get rid of.
We like to sleep at night.
So we welcome a lot of that regulation.
It makes sure that we adhere to really high standards and
that our work is indeed reliable.
And in order to do this, we work with lots of different people.
So we work with people who have very different backgrounds
to perhaps folks like ourselves in this room and it's a very
multidisciplinary environment.
So when we want to review this evidence together, we often
focus on things like static reports and people here like
yawn, how boring, move on, but actually when you have people
who come from very different disciplines, sometimes those
static reports are a lower barrier to actually getting
the work done that we need to get done, which is understanding
are our drugs safe and effective.
Then when we think about this word regulated, what does that
really mean?
It means lots of things across the industry that we work in,
but again, if we're thinking about statistics or data science
for us, there's kind of three main pillars to it.
Is what we're doing traceable?
So if I'm working on a piece of data, do I understand the
lineage of that data?
What happened to it before I got it and did the right things
happen to it?
Is my work reproducible?
So we submit something to a health authority.
They review it.
Perhaps they have some queries.
Maybe that query is a couple of weeks down the line.
Maybe it's a couple of years down the line.
We want to be able to come back to our work, understand if I
have a static figure, what's behind it?
Could I reproduce it?
And could I tweak it, right?
So that might be what we're thinking about.
Is it accurate?
I mean, that's a big, big part of what we do.
Often we think about going from writing a specification to
me, mostly as a human, interpreting that specification
into code, into an output.
All those steps we want to think about accuracy.
So not just is the number correct, but did I do the right
analysis?
So they're the kind of things that we think about.
So again, a lot of it sounds like we take a lot of these
steps very carefully and you might be thinking that sounds
like a hard industry to have change and sometimes it is and
we don't always take change up very rapidly.
Often we move a little bit more slowly and more carefully,
again, because of that regulated nature and because of the
high impact of us being right or wrong in our work.
So an error, making a mistake that propagates through to
something that affects a patient, is something that is we
want to avoid at all costs, right?
So again, we're kind of embracing that regulation, but
also trying to think about what does it mean to change?
And I think I want to talk today about two different types
of change.
So I think if you talk to any people here from the pharma
industry, we're all a little bit in different phases of these
big changes.
Moving from proprietary tools to open source tools, thinking
about moving from static to dynamic, there's change everywhere.
Thinking about changing the types of compute environments
that we work in, right?
So we're in this big kind of phase of change and it's taking
us a little bit of time and we're all at different phases.
But there's also non-disruptive change and I think
non-disruptive change, it keeps you energized, it keeps your
teams energized and it also prepares you for that big
destination that you want to get to.
And I think the example today is a nice example of changing
something in how we work that makes it better for someone
like a statistician, but ultimately we end up with the same
end product, which is our static report.
So we don't perhaps need to do so much stakeholder engagement.
We don't maybe need to do so much change of the entire process.
Maybe what we're doing is adding a pathway instead of changing
the entire pathway.
And so this is kind of a very simplified version of how we
work and again, I think we've seen that diagram, which is
not that dissimilar in several people's talks today.
How do we get from an idea to a result?
And so again, we think about code, that could be the code
that we're specifically writing or code that we're consuming
from, you know, an open source package.
We have a lot of metadata in how we work.
We work with standards.
So it could be, well, the footer of that table should look
like this or it could be, you know, the structure of your
data model should look a bit like this.
And then we have the input data itself.
So what are we going to consume in order to derive those
outputs that we are so interested in?
We have this kind of magic stuff in the middle and these
are our workflow managers, our execution models.
I think we have lots of different names for these things,
but these are things like make facilities.
These are things that help us with reproducibility.
They help us with audit trails and they help us to produce
our outputs in a way that we feel far more confident that
they are traceable, reproducible.
The accuracy really is done by the human, I would say.
And we want to get to maybe two places.
So dynamic outputs and static outputs.
And we've done all this hard work, right?
We've done all this hard work to make sure things are
reproducible, to make sure we have the audit trail.
And then we take the sledgehammer of control C and control
B and we copy and paste things from mystery location.
Two words document and that feels very fundamentally wrong
given all the work that has gone before it.
And it doesn't scale, it's error prone and it's a frustrating
place to be.
So we have different options here.
Well, do we just throw away our static outputs and we only
do dynamic because we feel like we have a very reproducible
pathway? Probably not.
Probably not tomorrow anyway, at least maybe in the future.
So we need to think about maintaining this pathway where
we're generating static reports because that is what our end
users want to consume.
That's where collaboration often happens.
So what do we do?
If we're impatient, what we can do is make an alternative
pathway.
So the feeling, the experience for the statistician or for
the statistical programmer generating that report is fundamentally
different, but the end consumer of that report has the same
experience.
So that enables us to make kind of this concept of stepwise
or non-disruptive change so we can still have, you know, hope
that we can improve on a much shorter timescale.
And it's really not just about the code and I'll repeat this
again in the next slide.
For us, the code that what we're showing here is pretty
simple and we're leveraging other packages like Office
ORR, but the processes is what really helped us here, developing
using good data science practices and bringing that forward
with different stakeholders and generating what we call company
compliant documents.
If you're again, not maybe from a pharma industry, you might
say, what's that mean?
Basically, we have very strict templates that are Word document
templates that have very particular styling and very particular
things that we need to put in certain places.
So again, the manual editing of those documents is a slow and
sometimes fussy process for us.
So I want to talk about just one use case that we covered in
this package.
So we're talking about sample size estimation and the reporting
of that calculation.
So before we begin a clinical trial, the very logical thing
for us to ask is how many people should we recruit?
How many people should be on the different treatments or the
different arms that we're going to have in our study to ensure
that the evidence that we generate is reliable, right?
And there are lots of statistical methods that help us to do
those calculations.
And this is what our statisticians are doing, given what we
know about the different studies that we're running.
And they want to bring this together.
So how we went about this is it was actually our statisticians
who came to us.
So I sit within a team that makes tools for our clinical
trials teams and they were saying, I really don't like this
part of my job.
It's frustrating.
It's slow.
It's a bottleneck.
I feel like my work is not as reproducible as it could be.
So we got them on board and we said, hey, let's think about
this together.
But let's also bring someone from our compliance department
because we want to make sure whatever we do in the end is
going to be something we can deploy and roll out.
So let's get them on board from the very start as well.
Let's design it together.
Let's leverage the good software development practices that
are so common in our teams, but maybe a little bit less common
for some of our other users.
And let's not wait too long.
So let's every two to three weeks show each other what we
have and try to see, does it look like it's working?
Is that going to be a better experience for you?
And bringing all of those things together, I think, helped
us to do this in a matter of, you know, weeks to get to a
first version.
So what does it look like?
So we've done a lot of talking about what it might look like
and I'm going to show you a couple of code snippets now and
the outputs.
So again, I think the goal to remember is people wanted to
generate Microsoft Word documents, but never know, never
have to go to that product.
And this is really what we can do using a combination and
for this particular use case, we used R Markdown.
So we made classes, specifically R6 classes for every element
of the report that we knew we wanted to create.
And what that really helped us to do is to think really
carefully about the structure.
So classes, they have attributes, right?
So they have elements and then they have methods and you
could think about these really separately.
So we could all kind of be like, I'll take that class, you
take that class and you can work in a very nicely parallelized
way and kind of a lot of your project management and your
design is kind of done for you.
So by simply filling out and initializing this class and
then doing our rendering in our getTitlePage method, we
can actually produce our Word document title page in a way
that is in the format that we expect it to be using all
of the different fields that we wanted to have.
So this was like a really exciting thing for us and this
is energizing, right?
People were like, oh, this is cool because I hate doing
that fab and they were getting on board because they were
excited.
It's the same thing for the different elements within the
report.
We created classes for things that had some unique properties
that were like, hey, can't just make a general table, but
here we can make a changelog table that's really easy to
populate, add rows and then we can render that again.
And we did that for all of the different elements across
our report and eventually render the entire document.
So what's underneath the hood here is a single or a markdown
file and you can render that and it will produce your Word
document at the end.
The other very exciting thing is you could co-locate the
document content with the calculation.
So if you're using a package like orpact, which is commonly
used in our company for general sample size calculations,
everything's now in the one place and that makes us all
feel really happy because if you want to go back to it, it's
just one single document that is going to generate the Word
document, but also reproduce the calculations should you
want to do that and you want to revisit them.
We also did a lot of logging here.
Again, I think that makes us all feel pretty safe.
When did I do it?
Who did it?
What was what kind of packages did I have?
What was my session looking like?
So again, we could do a lot of those logs so we could generate
a lot of that traceability again to kind of make sure that
we felt we were kind of keeping all of the good practices
that we had seen when we generate an output itself.
And we end up here.
I know this is a little bit small, but basically this is
it, right?
We get a whole document.
It's a single or a markdown file and we never have to
touch Microsoft Word or go in and edit it.
And that was really exciting and to get to that point and
I think again, it kind of brought in even more understanding
of I can see now what all this open source stuff can do
for me and isn't different to what I used to do before.
But again, it wasn't just about the code, right?
It was about thinking about how can we do this in a way
that makes sense from a software perspective as well.
So again, a report and at least in my mind, it really lends
itself to being object-oriented.
There's natural elements.
You need to have different methods for them, different
attributes, and then you can do a lot with assertions.
So assertions are before I'm going to make the class, I
can assert what I think the values of these attributes
should be.
So I can say I want my date to have this format.
If you don't give it to me in that format, I don't let
you make your class.
You have an error and you cannot go forward.
So that's a very kind of maybe strict approach.
You can choose different flavors of how strict you want
to be, but instead of then having to review a Word
document to make sure the date looks like a date, you can
do it upfront.
So a lot of those things that we perhaps don't enjoy doing
in our jobs, like a lot of that checking, we can automate
that in our approach as well, which I think, you know,
makes us able to focus on different things.
We also then as developers create a lot of tests for our
package and had a CICD pipeline.
So we had lots of different people wanting to come in
and work on our package as well.
We wanted to make that open to them, right?
So we couldn't scale to do every possible report in the
company.
So as we want to work together, making sure that we have
a lot of tests for every class.
So if we change something, we know we either, the tests
that we have passed, we need to add new tests or we've
broken something.
So let's not put that to code review just yet.
So that really helped us to have different people working
on the package and making sure that we were able to test
what we were doing as well.
Okay, so now and next.
So we've just finished successfully piloting this package
for our sample size report within-house.
We focus on two different scenarios.
So what if someone was doing an amendment, if they'd never
used the package before, what would that look like?
Or if they were doing a brand new study, could they jump
in and then what were the ways that they could jump in?
And in both cases, this is where your compliance people
are so helpful.
Understanding if the report was different, if we were using
a different version of the template, what will we need to
document in terms of our process?
Or does that look okay?
So we had a very engaged compliant person, Maritza, to
really help us there as well.
And we also have additional use cases that I didn't go
through today, but some of our teams were saying sometimes
something changes in the data and it's a small thing and
then I need to edit 50 figures in a Word document and I
don't want to do that.
It's very manual.
It takes me a lot of time.
So simply with using a YAML to say, hey, this is where, this
is the footer, was like the key, find that figure, update
it with this new figure.
We could also automate how people were updating their Word
documents, which again is saving a lot of time and also
is much less error prone than someone kind of going delete,
you know, copy, paste again, right?
So it's all about making sure that we have a much more kind
of traceable way to make those changes.
We thought a lot about how we were going to open source
this. It's kind of a funny one because it's very reliant
on our company templates.
So I'm very specific to what we're doing, but then equally
we didn't really want to just kind of keep this fully in
house. So what we're working on now is just having a very
generic document and showing how we developed our code to
do this. As I said, I don't think the code basis is that
extensive or complicated, but perhaps what we can do is
include a lot of our CICD as well.
So people can kind of, you know, take this, make their own
version, but kind of keep some of those practices
embedded. And we want to do even more use cases.
So I think this is where our testing will come into play
and we'll see how we can change the shape of it.
But really we hope this is going to create a much more
enjoyable experience for people who want to produce reports
in this way without us having to wait a couple of years
to make these types of changes, right?
So that's what we're really excited about. And I'm very
grateful to the people I worked with at Novartis. A combination
of people from different parts of Novartis coming to us
saying, hey, change this, this needs to be better. And you
know, when those people come to you, they bring you such
valuable knowledge and you get like such great insight into
how you can really help. And then also, as I said, people
from compliance, they know how to get stuff done. Making
friends with your compliance people and going together is
really, really important so that whatever you develop
has a very good chance of getting to the people you wanted
to get to, right? It's always disappointing to find out
at the end that perhaps you missed a step or it's going
to take a while to edit an SOP or working practice.
So good to get that done at the start as well.
Yeah, so thank you very much.
Thank you, Orla. Quickly, is Joshua Cook here? If so,
could you please come to the front?
So time for a couple questions. Top one here is, are the
reports compliant with accessibility standards? And if
so, how do you implement those accessibility elements? Not
sure if it's relevant for Novartis, but. Yeah, no, I think
it's a good question. I have to say, I think things like
colorblindness for graphics and things like that are
things that are important. But I think anything further
than that, I have to say, I don't think it's something
that we have actively checked in the documents, but it's
a good question. I actually wrote that down because
somebody said it at the Orin Pharma Summit, so I have
it in my notes to be like, are we doing that?
One more. How do you go about the exercise of scaling
this to preclinical or including other modeling results
in such reports? Like what are the steps of the design
thinking? Yeah, so I think it's very simple to include
different results or different code. I think where it
is not always as scalable as we would like is if the
templates look very different. Because then there
is some limitations in how dynamically we can work
with Docx and XML. So there's a little bit of
setup if the template is really different for sure.
But then if you have some type of generic report, I
think that's going to scale extremely well. And the
other thing is trying to get the people who want that
in. And I think it's a brilliant opportunity. They
have different skills than I do. I have different
skills than they do. So kind of getting people from
different parts of your business in, if they would
be willing to adopt some of the software practices,
you can kind of almost do that in a knowledge
sharing as well. But I think getting folks to ideally
come in as well and be part of the development is
I think how we can scale it as well.
One more quick one. So I was thinking about like
how you would work with your compliance people and
like what does that look like? Because you're writing
code, but then you produce an output. Then it's like
you produce the output, you show it to them, you say
is this good? And then you do some tweaking and then
is that the cycle that you go through with these
people? No. So I would say that's more like
statistician to statistician. So that would they
would be working together to say, hey, I have this
output. Can you double program it or can you
verify it? The process of what that looks like is
then designed with your compliance person. So what
documentation do you need to have to kind of have
evidence that you did that check? And then we would
also work a lot with Moritz and say, well, the
working practice for sample size reports is
currently like this. If we were to introduce or
markdown, what needs to change, if anything. So
she would help us a lot with the formal kind of
documents in our company. And she always has a
solution for many things. So a great person to
work with as well. Yeah. Great. Thank you so much.
Thanks, Luke.
Thank you.